Feature/vsc rproject (#482)
hpcleuven/VscDocumentation: source/compute/software/vsc_rproject.rst

.. _vsc-Rproject:

vsc-Rproject
============

Introduction
------------

vsc-Rproject is an in-house developed command-line tool that integrates the use of
RStudio Projects into our HPC environment. It facilitates the creation, management
and use of such vsc-Rproject environments. 

.. note::

>   In what follows, the term "vsc-Rproject environment" will always refer to

Author: I tried to better clarify this in the updated note.

  When refering to the RStudio Project folder specifically, the term "RStudio Project" will be used instead.

How to use
----------

vsc-Rproject can be used by simply loading the module.

.. code:: bash

       $ module load vsc-Rproject

Then, use the `vsc-rproject` command to use its different functionalities.

.. code:: bash

       $ vsc-rproject --help
       $ vsc-rproject --version

The `vsc-rproject` command provides four sub-commands that can be used to `configure` default behaviour
or `create`, `activate`, or `deactivate` a vsc-Rproject environment.
In what follows, the use of each of these sub-commands will be further explained.

.. _sub-command-create:

sub-command: create
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `create` sub-command allows you to create a new vsc-Rproject environment.

When creating a such environment, the only required argument is a project name. 

It is however strongly encouraged to also provide a "modules file".
This is a simple text file listing one module (full name and version) per line.
When providing a modules file, vsc-Rproject will ensure that these modules
are always loaded upon activating the vsc-Rproject environment.

> If no modules file is provided, the default R module will be used instead.

Author: I would like to keep the term "vsc-Rproject environment" when talking about the environment specifically. Activating/Opening a project is something that is done in RStudio which is still different from this.

for your project.

For more information, see:

.. code:: bash

       $ vsc-rproject create --help

.. note::

  Alternatively, you may also want to  modify your default settings more permanently via `vsc-rproject configure`.
  See :ref:`sub-command-configure` for more details.

.. _sub-command-activate:

sub-command: activate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `activate` sub-command can be used to activate an already existing vsc-Rproject environment.

.. code:: bash

       $ vsc-rproject activate NewProject

Activating a vsc-Rproject environment will load all the relevant modules listed in the modules file and
set the `$VSC_RPROJECT` environment variable which can be used to access the root directory of the project. 

.. _sub-command-deactivate:

sub-command: deactivate
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The `deactivate` sub-command deactivates the active vsc-Rproject environment. 
Deactivating a project will purge all loaded modules except for the cluster module 
and the vsc-Rproject module itself. Additionally, it will unset the `$VSC_RPROJECT` variable.
 
.. code:: bash

       $ vsc-rproject deactivate

.. _sub-command-configure:

> sub-command: configure
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: Use meaningful titles for people that do not know the tool
```suggestion
Default project configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
```

.. _vsc-Rproject:

vsc-Rproject
============

Introduction
------------

> `vsc-Rproject` is a command-line tool that facilitates the setup,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
``vsc-Rproject`` is a command-line tool that facilitates the setup,
```

> management and use of RStudio Projects in a (VSC) HPC context.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
management and use of RStudio Projects on VSC HPC clusters.
```

> Two main advantages of `vsc-Rproject` are that project settings and R libraries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Two main advantages of using ``vsc-Rproject`` are that the project settings and R libraries
```

> are kept separate for each project and that compiled extensions are easier

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are kept separate for each project. and that the compiled extensions are easier
```

to manage in a cluster with heterogeneous hardware.

.. note::

>    In what follows, the term "vsc-Rproject environment" refers to the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   In what follows, the term 'vsc-Rproject environment' refers to the
```

   environment created by vsc-Rproject. This environment enables the use of an
   associated RStudio Project.

How to use
----------

> vsc-Rproject can be used by simply loading the module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
vsc-Rproject can be used by simply loading the corresponding module.
```

.. code:: bash

   $ module load vsc-Rproject

> Then, use the ``vsc-rproject`` command to use its different functionalities.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, use the ``vsc-rproject`` command for its different functionalities.
```

.. code:: bash

   $ vsc-rproject --help
   $ vsc-rproject --version

The ``vsc-rproject`` command provides four sub-commands that can be used to ``configure`` default behaviour
or ``create``, ``activate``, or ``deactivate`` a vsc-Rproject environment.

.. _creating_a_project:

Creating a project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The command ``vsc-rproject create`` allows you to create a new RStudio Project alongside its vsc-Rproject environment.

When creating a new project, the only required argument is a project name.

We recommend to always provide a "modules file" when creating new projects.
This is a simple text file listing a module (full name and version) per line.
With a modules file, vsc-Rproject will ensure that these modules are always
loaded upon activating the corresponding vsc-Rproject environment.
If no modules file is provided, the default R module will be used instead.

> The following command will create a modules.txt file in your home directory,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following command will create a ``modules.txt`` file in your data directory,
```

- ``R/4.4.1-gfbf-2023b``
- ``R-bundle-CRAN/2024.06-foss-2023b``

.. code:: bash

   $ printf "R/4.4.1-gfbf-2023b\nR-bundle-CRAN/2024.06-foss-2023b\n" > ~/modules.txt

.. note::

   When you specify a modules file, it should always contain the R module.

To create a new RStudio Project and vsc-Rproject environment using this modules file, run the following command:

.. code:: bash

   $ vsc-rproject create MyProject --modules="$VSC_HOME/modules.txt"

This will create a new RStudio Project named "MyProject" at the default location: ``$VSC_DATA/Rprojects``.
The modules.txt file will be used when creating the project and stored in ``$VSC_DATA/Rprojects/.vsc-rproject/modules.env``.

.. note::

   If you wish to update the modules list for an existing project, you should manually
   add it to the `.vsc-rproject/modules.env` file.

The project folder will contain ``.Renviron``, ``.Rprofile`` and
``.R/Makevars`` configuration files, which are therefore specific to the
project.

The ``.Renviron`` file will set the ``R_LIBS_USER`` variable to point to the project's R package library.
This can be found at the root of the project, under ``/library/<OS>/R``.

> The ``.Rprofile`` file will be configured to set the CRAN mirror to ``"https://cloud.r-project.org"`` (default)

Author: This change was also suggested previously. However, it is stored as a literal string in `.Rprofile`.
I did not intend it as a direct link to the repository. What's the added value of having this url here?

> The ``.Rprofile`` file will be configured to set the CRAN mirror to ``"https://cloud.r-project.org"`` (default)

Author: Here, I'm just telling the user that the .Rprofile will use this literal url to set the cran mirror. 
That's why it is in double back ticks and quoted, to get something like `"https://cloud.r-project.org"`
I don't want to hide it, nor is it a link the user needs to check out themselves. This is just a CRAN package repo.

   appropriate setting.

If you want to enable git within the RStudio Project you can add the ``--enable-git`` flag.
To automatically activate the vsc-Rproject environment after creating it, use ``--activate``.

If you are not satisfied with the default behaviour, you can modify the behaviour
of ``vsc-rproject create`` by providing additional command-line arguments.
You can specify ``--location`` to create your project in a different location.
The ``--cran`` argument can be used to provide a specific CRAN mirror for your project.
Finally ``--march`` allows you to choose a different the microarchitecture optimization
for your project.

For more information, see:

.. code:: bash

   $ vsc-rproject create --help

.. note::

   Alternatively, you may also want to  modify your default settings more permanently via `vsc-rproject configure`.
   See :ref:`Default project configuration <default_project_configuration>` for more details.

.. _activating_a_project:

Activating a project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``activate`` sub-command can be used to activate an already existing vsc-Rproject environment.

.. code:: bash

   $ vsc-rproject activate MyProject

> Activating a vsc-Rproject environment will load all the relevant modules listed in the modules file and

Author: ```suggestion
Activating a vsc-Rproject environment will load all the relevant modules listed in the modules file, and
```

> set the ``$VSC_RPROJECT`` environment variable which can be used to access the root directory of the project.

Author: similar to above, "will" is the conjugated verb previously in the sentence, set should be used as root.

.. _deactivating_a_project:

Deactivating a project
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``deactivate`` sub-command deactivates the active vsc-Rproject environment.
Doing so will purge all loaded modules except for the cluster module and the vsc-Rproject module itself.
Additionally, it will unset the ``$VSC_RPROJECT`` variable.

.. code:: bash

   $ vsc-rproject deactivate

.. _default_project_configuration:

Default project configuration
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you wish to change the default behaviour of vsc-Rproject, you can configure your
personal default settings with the ``configure`` sub-command.

.. note::

   You can at all times check your current default settings with `vsc-rproject --defaults`.

``vsc-rproject configure`` allows you to set your prefered default R with ``--default-r``.
You may also set a new default location for your RStudio Projects with ``--location``.
Finally you can still configure your prefered default CRAN mirror using ``--cran``
and the default ``-march`` compiler settings with ``--march``.

> These personal configurations will be stored in ``$VSC_HOME/.vsc-rproject-config``.

Author: This file is not something the user should manually modify.

You can provide an alternative path for this configuration file by setting
the `$VSC_RPROJECT_CONFIG` environment variable. This e.g. allows to
apply different defaults for different clusters.
If ``$VSC_RPROJECT_CONFIG`` is set, ``vsc-rproject`` will consider it and use it if possible.
If ``$VSC_RPROJECT_CONFIG`` is not set (default) ``vsc-rproject`` will use the default config file: ``~/.vsc-rproject-config``.

If at any point you wish to reset your configuration to the the original default settings, simply run:

.. code:: bash

   $ vsc-rproject configure --reset

vsc-Rproject and RStudio Server
-------------------------------

When launching a new session via the :ref:`Studio Server <rstudio-server>` app in the Open Ondemand portal, you can use the ``pre-run scriplet`` to load the vsc-Rproject environment.

.. code::

   module load vsc-Rproject; vsc-rproject activate MyProject

.. warning::

   The R module selected in the OnDemand form must match the R module that was used to create the project!
   Otherwise dependency conflicts may arise as RStudio Server will replace the modules loaded via the pre-run scriplet.

> Once inside the RStudio session, you still need to open the RStudio Project via the interface.

Author: I think this is something better left to the RStudio Documentation itself. Opening an RStudio Project from within RStudio is pretty straightforward. 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5ba65da9-0dcb-4a57-8057-f7e3b0595f54)

> Once inside the RStudio session, you still need to open the RStudio Project via the interface.

Author: I think this is something better left to the RStudio Documentation itself. Opening an RStudio Project from within RStudio is pretty straightforward.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6ec13195-9f6e-4909-ba9d-0d8c558c61d1)
